---
title: 'Cognitive Robotics'
date: 2025-11-26
permalink: /posts/2025/11/cognitive_robotics/
tags:
  - cool posts
  - category1
  - category2
---

"The human brain is, after all, the best example we have of an intelligent system. If we can learn its methods, we can use these biologically inspired paradigms to build more intelligent machines."
                  *~Von Neumann, The Computer and the Brain*

---

***This blog post is designed to give a pithy perspective into the fascinating world of Cognitive Robotics and what it specifically means to me.***

NeuroAI Systems (Part 2)
========================

Feedback. 

It's a ubiquitous term. It's also understandingly very powerful, but what makes it so?

I had the wonderful opportunity to experiment in the analog circuits lab in my third semester. My first experience in feedback actually occured just over a month ago in the same lab. Two weeks prior to that day, I had burnt my hand(only slightly) when my lab partner and I were tinkering with a CL100 transistor in the process of building an audio amplifier. At the end of that lab, our oscilloscope showed the same dreaded noisy sine wave, with no tangible output emnating from the speaker. 

It felt excruciatingly tiring, knowing every time entering the lab that there will be some deviation from the expected results. I couldn't understnad why somebody hadn't come up with a tangible solution. So imagine my surprise when we were successfully able to design an RC phase shift oscillator in under two hours during the next lab! The output was exceptionally table and the target frequency was exactly what we had calculated it to be.

From the perspective of an introspective engineer, it made me curious as to why 


