---
title: 'Human Centered AI'
date: 2025-11-26
permalink: /posts/2025/11/HCAI/
tags:
  - cool posts
  - category1
  - category2
---

"You are smarter than your data. Data do not understand causes and effects; humans do.”
 *~Judea Pearl, The Book of Why*

 ---

***This blog post is designed to give a pithy perspective into the fascinating world of Human Centered Artificial Intelligence and what it specifically means to me.***


I have always been a bookworm for as long as I can remember, but I do remember watching a few cartoons when I was younger. One of my absolute favourites was this japanese cartoon named 'Doraemon', which is the name of a robot cat which comes from the future to help a boy in his daily life. The plot of the cartoon had many impossible elements, but every time I used to watch it, I still remember feeling intrigued as to how a robot could be so much smarter than a human in the broad lens of the show. 

It's hard to exactly visualise what an AGI(artificial general intelligence) should look like but I like to think of **self credible curiosity** as the closest description of its primary trait. 

*'Self credible'* refers to a sense of identity along with a sense of understanding what it means to follow through. This is important because it does not suffice if a machine is hard coded to follow a certain set of rules or instructions. There will always be some measures of the present which the introspective engineers of the future will need to modify according to the progressing social aspects and norms of humanity. Building credibility must begin not in our perception of the machine designed, but in the design of the machine itself. 

*'Curiosity'* refers to an ability to ask impactful questions. Throughout our long history of scientific advances, it is no secret that many of a researcher's valuable years are spent formulating the right question. Many of the times, the questions coincidentally happen to map to another question of similar interest but a vastly different field of origin. The new era of conducive research requires this interdisciplinary exploartion to be proactively built into the machine. 

Combining these two ideas is at the core of human centered artificial general intelligence. The idea of ensuring that AI works with humans every step of the way is just the start, but it is bound to go a long way. 

A pertinent question here could be regarding the proof of self credibile curiosity. How can we definitively conclude that a machine is not feigning self credible curiosity to itself and to us? This is what the next thought experiment will try to address.

---

A Trustworthy Thought Experiment
================================

Consider the following scenario:-

*"<u>Pattern Pattern everywhere</u> : Consider two identical self credible, curious AI systems. Can you design a test that can act as a reliable standard to assess and evaluate their competency? Will the same test hold in a multi agent setting?"*

I leave you to answer this for yourself. I must admit that this is a hard question and designing a suitable test will require a level of ingenuity higher than anything we've seen before. I feel that this is a question that will inexorably pop up every once in a while and while an objectively perfect test might be impossible to create, several ideas may come close. Personally, I believe paradoxes hold the key to unlocking the next frontiers of true intelligence.
However, questions like the ones above need to be discussed openly and constructively to create meaningful impact.

---

So, this brings us to the end of the blog series. It was an amazing journey where we discussed several exciting topics and I hope you found it useful. If you've made it this far, I would like to leave you with a parting thought:- 

'The human brain is so inscrutable that we always manage to draw an analogy between the brain and the most advanced technology that has been built at the time. But why stop at an analogy? Two or more roads may diverge in the yellow wood, but they might intersect somewhere in the distance. The paths that leads to that intersection hold surprises and hurdles in every step, but the lessons we learn from them are in by themselves a reminiscent nostalgia of our own determination to explore the unknown.'

Thank You!
